.TH KERNELSTUB "1"

.\" To view this file while editing, run it through groff:
.\"   groff -Tascii -man python.man | less

.SH NAME
kernelstub \- The automatic Linux kernel EFIstub manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kernelstub
[
.B \-e
.I esp-path
]
[
.B \-r
.I root-fs-path
]
[
.B \-k
.I kernel-image-path
]
.br
           [
.B \-i
.I initrd-image-path
]
[
.B \-o 
.I "kernel-options"
]
.br
           [
.B \-a
.I "kernel-options"
]
[
.B \-d
.I "kernel-options"
]
.br
           [
.B \-g
.I log-file-path
]
[
.B \-h
]
[
.B \-p
]
[
.B \-f
]
[
.B \-l
|
.B \-n
]
.br
           [
.B \-s
|
.B \-m
]
[
.B \-v...
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Kernelstub is a program to setup and configure booting without a traditional 
bootloader.
It can configure booting through systemd-boot compatible loader files, or 
through the kernel's built-in efi stub loader.
It also runs automatically when the kernel is updated to keep this 
configuration up to date.
.br
It supports adding/setting different kernel command line options as well as 
keeping older kernels available for use as a backup.
It can operate on an ESP and root partition which are different from the one 
the system is currently booted from.
.SH COMMAND LINE OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "\-e, --esp-path " path
Manually setting the path to the EFI System Partition. 
This value is saved into the configuration. 
Default is /boot/efi.
.TP
.BI "\-r, --root-path " path
Manually specify the path to the root partition, in case kernelstub is being 
run on a system other than the target.
Defaults to /.
.TP
.BI "\-k, --kernel-path " path
Specify the location of the Linux kernel image/vmlinuz.
Defaults to /vmlinuz.
.TP
.BI "\-i, --initrd-path " path
Specify the location of the initrd image.
Defaults to /inird.img.
.TP
.BI "\-o, --options " 'options'
Specify the kernel cmdline options/boot flags.
This will overwrite any existing options in the configuration.
Use single or double quotes to surround multiple options.
This option will save the specified changes into the configuration.
.br
If you want to add/remove options from the existing 
configuration, see 
.B \-a
and 
.B \-d
.TP
.BI "\-a, --add-options " 'options'
Add kernel cmdliing options into the existing configuration.
This will avoid adding duplicate items if they're already present. 
Use single or double quotes to surround multiple options.
This option will save the specified changes into the configuration.
.TP
.BI "\-d, --delete-options " 'options'
Remove existing kernel cmdline options from the existing configuration.
If an option specified here is not present in the list of options, kernelstub
will silently ignore it.
Use single or double quotes to surround multiple options.
This option will save the specified changes into the configuration.
.TP
.BI "\-g, --log-file " 'path'
Specify an alternative log file location. 
.TP
.B \-h, --help 
Prints the usage information and exits. 
.TP
.B \-p, --print-config
Prints the current configuration settings and exits. 
.TP
.B \-f, --force-update
Forcibly update the system loader.conf file to set the current OS as the 
default.
This may change your system default boot order. 
.TP
.B \-l, --loader 
Creates a systemd-boot compatible loader entry in ESP/loader/entries for the
current OS.
This option is saved in the configuration.
.TP
.B \-n, --no-loader.
Don't create a loader entry for the current OS. 
This option disables the behavior of 
.B \-l
and is saved in the configuration.
.TP
.B \-s, --stub 
Enables automatic management of the kernel efistub bootloader. 
This option is saved in the configuration.
.TP
.B \-m, --manage-only 
Disables automatic management of the kernel efistub bootloader.
This option disables the behavior of 
.B \-s
and is saved in the configuration. 
.TP
.B \-v, --verbose
Make program output more verbose. 
Up to two 
.B \-v
flags can be used at once (additional flags are ignored).
.TP
.SH FILES 
.IP \fI/etc/kernelstub/configuration\fP
Default location of the kernelstub configuration file.
The file is a JSON format file with two main configurations in it;
.I 'default'
and
.I 'user'.
The 'esp_path' key is a string, 'config_rev' is an int, 'kernel_options' is a
list of strings, and all other keys are booleans.
.br
It is highly recommended to use the kernelstub utility to modify the 
configuration rather than by editing the configuration file directly.
See the 
.B CONFIGURATION
section for more details.
.PP
.IP \fI/etc/default/kernelstub\fP
This is a vendor-supplied file that can contain certain options for individual
OSs or hardware-specific values. 
.SH CONFIGURATION
Specific configuration defaults may have been modified by your OS developer or
hardware vendor. 
.br
Each kernelstub configuration contains the following keys:
.IP \fIkernel_options\fP
This is a list of strings, with each string being an individual kernel cmdline
option.
.br
Default: ["quiet", "splash"]
.br
Configured using the 
.B \-a, -d, 
and 
.B -o
flags.
.PP
.IP \fIesp_path\fP
String - Points to the path where the EFI System Partition is mounted.
.br
Default: "/boot/efi".
.br
Configured using the 
.B \-e
flag. 
.PP
.IP \fIsetup_loader\fP
boolean - enables or disables installing the loader entry file.
.br
.I false:
(default) Skips installing a loader entry file.
.br
.I true:
Installs a loader entry file.
.br
Configured using the 
.B \-l
/
.B \-n
flags. 
.PP
.IP \fImanage_mode\fP
boolean - toggles between installing the efistub bootloader or using 
management-only mode.
.br
.I false:
(default) sets up the Linux kernel built-in efistub bootloader in the system
NVRAM.
.br
.I true:
Skips setting up the built-in efistub bootloader.
.br
Configured using the 
.B \-s
/
.B \-m
flags. 
.PP
.IP \fIforce_update\fP
boolean - Forcibly overwrites the main systemd-boot configuration on each 
update.
.br
.I false:
(default) Does not automatically modify the systemd-boot configuration to make 
the current OS the default.
.br
.I true:
Overwrites the systemd-boot configuration on each update to ensure the current
OS is the default.
.br
This option cannot be enabled from the command line and must be enabled in the
configuration file directly. 
This is due to its ability cause the system to lose alternate boot entries. 
.PP
.IP \fIlive_mode\fP
boolean - Live mode allows updates on run on the live system without triggering
kernelstub. 
When live mode is enabled, kernelstub silently exits successfully
to allow software updates to work without overwriting the current boot 
configuration.
If kernelstub is run manually, live mode will be automatically disabled. 
.I false:
(default) Disables live mode.
.br
.I true:
Enables live mode.
.PP
.IP \fIconfig_rev\fP
integer - Tells kernelstub what format of configuration to expect. 
.br
If this value is lower than the current configuration revision supported by the
code, kernelstub will attempt to automatically migrate the configuration to the
new version. 
.PP
.SH BUGS
Please report bugs to https://github.com/isantop/kernelstub/issues
.SH EXAMPLE
To set up the kernel efistub bootloader to be the default boot option
.PP
.RS 
\f(CWsudo kernelstub\fP
.RE
.PP
To include some output
.PP
.RS 
\f(CWsudo kernelstub \-v\fP
.RE
.PP
To use kernelstub as a manager for systemd-boot configurations
.PP
.RS 
\f(CWsudo kernelstub \-vlm\fP
.RE
Note that the l and m flags are only required once; they are saved in the 
configuration file.
.PP
To add the "quiet" kernel option and remove the "splash" option:
.PP
.RS 
\f(CWsudo kernelstub \-a 'quiet' -d 'splash'\fP
.RE
.PP
If you have lost your boot configuration because another OS overwrote your 
setup, you can recover like so
.PP
.RS 
\f(CWsudo mount /dev/root_partition /mnt\fP
.br
\f(CWsudo mount /dev/esp_partition /mnt/boot/efi\fP
.br
\f(CWsudo kernelstub \\\fP
\f(CW    \--root-partition /mnt \\\fP
\f(CW    \--esp-path /mnt/boot/efi \\\fP
\f(CW    \--kernel-path /mnt/vmlinuz \\\fP
\f(CW    \--initrd-path /mnt/initrd.img \\\fP
\f(CW    \--options 'quiet splash' \\\fP
\f(CW    \-vslf\fP
.RE
.PP
Adjust your mount commands to correctly mount your root and ESP partitions.
.SH AUTHOR
Ian Santopietro <isantop@gmail.com>
.SH INTERNET RESOURCES
Main website/git repository:  https://github.com/isantop/kernelstub
.br


